AMBER HINDS: Now we are going
to have a video from Kelin Chauhan.
He will be talking about
Accessibility: The Big Picture,
starting out with learning
accessibility can be overwhelming,
and there’s a ton of information.
His video will talk about where
you can get started with that
and help you navigate
through the learning process.
Kelin has been working in
WordPress in front-end development
for almost five years.
He's currently working at rtCamp,
a WordPress VIP-gold agency partner
where he's had the chance to work
with multiple enterprise clients.
Kelin found his interest in the
world of web accessibility recently
through one of those
clients, and that exposure
to accessibility has helped shape
his perception towards the importance
of inclusivity, and how a developer
can make changes in their mindset
to include accessibility
at the time of development.
Kelin is here and is available
if you want to speak with Kelin
or ask him any questions in
the idea section in the chat.
KELIN CHAUHAN: Hey,
everyone, how's it going?
How are you doing today?
My name is Kelin, and welcome
to this lightning session.
This lightning session is called
Accessibility: The Big Picture.
And before we talk about the things
we are discussion in this talk,
let's talk a little
bit about who am I.
My name is Kelin Chauhan.
I am a web developer
based out of India.
I have been working in front end
as well as WordPress development
almost five years now.
Currently, I'm working with rtCamp.
RtCamp is a WordPress
VIP-Gold agency partner.
Around last year through rtCamp
I had this opportunity work
with one of the clients who were
working on enhancing accessibility
for the website.
That is when I have to take a
deeper dive into this topic,
and I have to learn how to implement
accessibility-friendly websites.
And it was overwhelming at
first because I did not know
where to start from.
When you start out with
learning about this topic,
it can be a little bit
overwhelming at first.
This session is about giving
you a mental model, a blueprint
so you can approach this
topic in a structural manner.
If you're a developer, you will be
able to see what accessibility is
and you will also be able
to see what kind of things
that you are going to
be doing as a developer
for implementing accessibility
friendly websites.
You will be able to see
what kind of changes
in practices you need to
make, and what kind of changes
in your mindset that you need
to make in order to make sure
that you are containing [phonetic]
accessibility at the
time of development.
And if you are a product
manager or project manager,
then you will be able to see the
technical side of this aspect.
Let’s jump right into it.
Accessibility, what is it?
Accessibility is the practice
of making your websites usable
by as many people as possible.
Now, this is not a
standard definition
of what web accessibility is,
but it is something that
made a lot of sense to me
because the kinds of
things you would be doing
in order to make accessibility
friendly websites would mean
that the website usability
is going to be optimal,
and that it's going to be usable
by as many people as possible.
Let's talk a little bit about that.
Let's talk a little bit about
what do we mean when we say,
usable by as many
people as possible.
Different users have different
needs depending on their situation
to be able to consume content
on the Internet efficiently.
So, the different situations,
such as let's see say
that there is a user
who is not able to see,
or the user can only partially see.
In such a situation the user
would be using assisted tools
called screen readers.
Screen readers are the topic
of this session, mainly,
but there are different tools
depending on different situations
and needs that the
user may be using.
I encourage you to take a look
into those tools and take a look
into how they are
used in your own time,
but because this is a
lightning session, we are going
to be only focusing
on screen readers.
You can find information about
these tools and how they are used
on W3C’s documentation.
When we are talking about different
situations, it can be also
for temporary situations,
for instance let's say
that your mouse stops working
or the [unintelligible ]
of your laptop stops working.
In such a situation you would be
entirely relying on your keyboard
to interact with your website.
And if your website has not
been developed considering
these different needs
and situations in mind,
then you may not be providing
the optimal experience
that your users deserve.
Accessibility is about that.
Accessibility is about considering
these various users and needs
and these different situations and
developing so that you are ensuring
that the user experience that
your website provides is optimal.
All right.
Let's take a look into
what are screen readers.
Screen readers are a form
of assistive technology
that renders text
or image as speech or braille.
Usually screen readers are a
piece of software that are built
into your operating system.
For instance, on Mac or iOS,
and iPadOS we have VoiceOver.
In Windows we have Narrator and
in Android we have TalkBack.
Before we go further and talk
about the technical [lead ends]
of how screen readers work, I want
to show you this quick video clip
that will show you what
kind of experience is it
to use a screen reader, and how a
user actually uses a screen reader.
So, let me play this clip for you.
[video clip playing]
SCREEN READER: List two items,
link, skip to main contact, link,
skip to search, visited
link, image, MDN home page,
main menu navigation,
list three items, link, reference,
headings menu, heading level,
heading level, heading,
heading level three, link,
introducing the CSS Cascade.
KELIN: As you saw in this video
clip that the screen reader
starts reading content on the
screen from the top of the screen
and moves all the way to
the bottom of the screen.
And along the way it reads about
the content that it encounters
on the screen, and it, also,
announces about the
underlining meaning
of that content and of
supporting information.
For example, if it's a button,
then screen reader will be announcing
that this is a button and
that it has an action,
and that it can be
triggered by clicking on it.
All right.
Let's take a look into
how screen readers work.
The way the screen readers
work is by creating something
called Accessibility API.
Accessibility APIs are a piece
of software you can think of
or an API that your
operating system provides,
and screen readers they create
this Accessibility API for knowing
what’s on the screen.
How does Accessibility API
know what’s on your webpage.
For that there’s something
called Accessibility Tree.
An Accessibility Tree is something
that your browser generates based
on your webpage, and it contains
information on about what is
on your webpage, and it also
contains some structural information
and some meaningful information
such as if it is a button,
then it's clickable
and so on and so forth.
The way it works is that screen
readers create the Accessibility API.
And Accessibility API they create
or consume Accessibility Tree
from the browser, and that is
how your screen reader knows
what is on the screen and
what is on your webpage.
This means that if
you want to make sure
that the accessibility experience
of your website is optimal,
then you want to make sure
that the Accessibility Tree
that your page generates,
is optimal and has useful
and rich information in it.
Accessibility Tree is a
really important aspect
of accessibility experience.
It would be nice if you could
interact with this tree and add data,
helpful information into it, right.
There is no direct
way of doing that yet,
but there are indirect
ways of doing that.
The indirect ways are one, by using
something called Semantic HTML.
This means that in order to
render some of the contact
on the page you will be
using the most optimal tag
that can represent
that information.
For instance, if you have a
heading, you will be using H1
so that screen readers would know
that this is a level one heading.
This is how Semantic HTML gives
some more extra information
to such tools so they can
announce more helpful contact
and some context to the screen reader
users and assist to those users.
We will be taking a
look into that more.
Let's take a look into the other way
which is ARIA Attributes and Roles.
ARIA Attributes and Roles
in itself is a bigger topic
but for the purpose of
this lightning session,
let me give you a small example.
For instance, let's say that
you have a drop-down menu.
The drop-down menu has stayed.
It can be opened,
or it can be closed.
How do you tell such
tools what is the state
of the application currently or
the drop-down menu currently?
How do you tell the screen reader,
is it opened or is it closed?
You can do that by using
something called ARIA Expanded.
It's an ARIA Attribute and its value
can be set to either true or false.
If the value is
true, then that means
that the screen reader would
now know that the current state
of this menu is open.
And if the value is false,
then the screen readers now know
that the current state
of this menu is closed.
And depending on when
the user drags the menu,
you would be writing
JavaScript code,
so that you can update
the attribute’s value,
so it reflects the correct state.
That is one way how
ARIA Attributes can help
in providing such stateful
information to screen readers
and assistive tools.
Depending on the different
situation and the kind
of information you want
to give to the user,
you would be using the
combination of Semantic HTML
along with ARIA
Attributes and Roles.
Let's take a look into the
example of how Semantic HTML helps
in creating the user
experience for assistive tools.
On this slide we
have a screen shot.
On the left-hand side we
have a snapshot of HTML.
And as you can see this
HTML is not really semantic.
It has a lot of divisions in
it, and as a result you can see
on the right-hand side that the
resulting Accessibility Tree
is not really well structured.
By the way you can take a look
at this Accessibility Tree
from your browser’s
developer console.
Most of the browsers
provide you to look
into the Accessibility Tree
that the page generates.
You can see that it is not
really well structured.
It's really difficult to understand
which link belongs to which text
and which image belongs to which
text and so on and so forth.
It’s confusing.
Now, let's take a look at what
happens when you update this HTML
and make it semantic.
In this next slide I have
highlighted the piece of tags
that has been updated to use
the semantic HTML tags instead.
In here I have the wrapper division
into ul and the child divisions
into li elements and the title
has been written now into h3 tag.
Now you can see that the
resulting Accessibility Tree
is very-well formatted in a way.
You can see that there is one
list and one, two, three, four,
five list items.
This means when screen readers
consume this Accessibility Tree
via Accessibility API, they can
now tell that there is a list,
and they can announce that there
is a list, and they can announce
that there are one, two, three,
four, five list items on the list.
Now screen readers can, also,
announce when they
reach this list item,
they can announce that this
is list item one of five.
That way the screen reader user now
knows in which list item they are on.
Now the screen readers
can also announce
when the list item is starting,
and when the list item is ending.
That way the screen
reader would know,
and the screen reader user would
know that all the information
that was open between these two was
relating to the same information
or same entity.
Now, the other thing that this
designed HTML helps with is that now
because we have written
the title in h3,
the screen reader user
can use shortcuts to jump
between these h3 titles.
That way they do not have to consume
content, all the content one by one.
They can just quickly
jump between these trees
and quickly get a sense of
what this list is all about.
Like you can see, just changing
these three things, ul, Ii’s
and h3, just changing such small
amount of code has resulted
in such an enhanced
accessibility experience.
I encourage you to be mindful
as developers next time
when you are writing any complement
in your code, then make sure
that you are taking some bit of
time to be mindful of what kind
of HTML tags you are using.
What you can do is go
to W3C or MDN system
and see different HTML tags
and try to make the best guess
in the given situation, and for
the given piece of information
that I'm trying to render, which
HTML tag is best suited for that.
And it might take some
time in the initial stage.
It’s a couple of weeks
only, but after those couple
of weeks it becomes the firsthand
nature and it becomes part
of the practice.
Especially, does not require a lot
of effort to make such decisions,
right.
And making such decisions can
have a greater impact like we saw.
I really encourage you
that you take the time.
Another thing that I want to
highlight is that only Semantic HTML
is not going to be
enough in all situations.
Though in most
situations it will help.
But in some situations, you will
also have to use ARIA Attributes,
and I encourage you to learn
about ARIA attributes as well.
In this next slide we have comparison
of both the Accessibility Trees,
and you can see the
one on the right,
the one updated has a
better structure to it.
So, how do you know what are the
things that you need to consider
while working on your website?
What are the things that you
need to consider to ensure
that your website is accessibility
compliant or accessibly friendly?
For that there is
something called WCAG..
WCAG is a set of recommendations
that explains how to create
accessibility friendly websites.
For that there is this
resource on W3C's website
that you can just visit
the At a Glance section
and you can get a better sense
of what this is all about.
They also have a quick reference
guide where you can just go
through each and every
recommendation one by one
and you can see what are the
different techniques that you can use
in order to achieve each
and every recommendation.
It is a really helpful resource,
and you can spend some time
to learn about these
different guidelines.
And after some time this also
becomes a firsthand nature.
All right, so the other way to know
what are the accessibility violations
that you're making is by using WAVE,
the ARC Toolkit or Axe DevTools.
These are browser-based extensions
that can be used to know
what are the violations
that your webpage is making.
One thing I want to highlight is
that these tools are not going
to tell you the hundred
percent of the violations
that you are making, but they will
do a good job in highlighting 30
to 50% of those violations.
The last tool
[unintelligible 16:44]
is Pally.
It can be used for automating tests,
billing times or scarcity times
so that these tests
can be automated.
All right, with that,
I believe that is pretty much it.
And thank you very much
for attending this session.
You can reach out to me
if you have any doubts
or if you need any help with
getting started with accessibility.
I'm available @kelin1003 and on
social media such as LinkedIn,
Twitter or Instagram.
Thank you very much
and have a good day.